---
layout:   post
title:    I finally understood bind vs call and you should too
tags:     [javascript, this, bind, call]
comments: true
---

Two very useful JS functions to know are `bind()` and `call()`. Here are a two things that helped me to understand them.

## 1. They both associate the function's this

I love donut. Are you? Well you better are because we will be using donut example! Let's say I have this function:

```
var gimmeDonut = function(){
  console.log(this.donutType);
}
```

When I run `gimmeDonut();` function, it returns `undefined` because `gimmeDonut` does not have `donutType` attribute. Let's create an object container for `donutType`:

```
var obj = {
  donutType: 'glazed'
}
```

When I run `gimmeDonut();` I still get `undefined` because `obj` and `gimmeDonut` are two separate things. `this` in `gimmeDonut` is not "connected" to `obj`. To solve our problem we can use `.call()` function to make JS think that `obj` is associated to `gimmeDonut`.

```
gimmeDonut.call(obj);
//'glazed'
```
We just associated `gimmeDonut` with `obj`. Everytime we use `.call`, the `this` inside the function will be associated to the argument (in this case, `obj`). You can think of `console.log(this.donutType)` as `console.log(obj.donutType)` because `obj = this` now.

Similarly, we can use bind. Bind works much like call (and `.apply()`, but that will be covered later; call and apply are very similar; they differ only in the type of arguments they are taking). Bind also connects the function with an object like call does, except *bind returns a function*.

```
var donutBinder = gimmeDonut.bind(obj);
donutBinder();
// 'glazed'
```

Both call and bind associate `this` with `obj`.

## 2. Bind is really Call + ()

Did you see what just happened? If you type `gimmeDonut.bind(obj);` (or if you just typed `donutBinder`) you'll get a function return. Bind, unlike call, gives you a bound function. It does what call does but instead of *executing the code*, it gives you the original code that is bound with the object.

Since bind returns a function, to execute it we just add a pair of parentheses `()`. You can do something like this: `gimmeDonut.bind(obj)();` and it will return `glazed`.

In short:

```
gimmeDonut.bind(obj)() === gimmeDonut.call(obj)
//true
```

## 3. Use bind to save the newly-bound function for later, call to invoke it immediately

So when to know when to use bind and when to use call? Now that I know what they both do, I prefer to use bind because it preserves the function after it was bound. Calling `gimmeDonut.call(obj)` invokes the function immediately. If I want to save the bound function for later, I would do something like `var donutForLater = gimmeDonut.bind(obj);`. Now I have `donutForLater` function that I can call whenever I need it. 
